README.md, before:


# Hybrid Monocular Distance Estimation using CNN + Pinhole Residual
## Mohamad Ghanem, 101192896, Group Number 195

# Initialization steps 
Install requirements using conda:
```bash
conda create --name PROJ3106 python=3.10 -c conda-forge
```
Activate Conda environment:
```bash
conda activate PROJ3106
```
Install dependencies  using pip:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

>[!important] Large files are excluded from this repo for portability. Including a 12GB dataset won't do anyone any good and will just slow down the process. To download the dataset separately, please visit the dataset website (included in references) **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)
> To counter this issue, I have uploaded a pickle file of all the training, calibration, and label sets in the cache folder, thank you for understanding

After cloning the repo and installing the packages from the requirements text file, you can start inference by running this command (make sure you are in the root directory)

```bash
python infer.py --checkpoint resnet18_model/best_model.pth --image unseen_photos/000229.png
```

You can use any model checkpoint you would like to investigate, resnet18_model contains the model with the ResNet-18 pre trained weights.
custom_best_model contains the model with the custom 4 block CNN.

Since the image file is too large to publish on github, I added a random subset of photos from the dataset to "unseen_photos", feel free to pick any of them to infer. You can also play around more with the repo by downloading the dataset from the website.


# Downloading Dataset
Due to the large content of this dataset, please follow the instructions below to download the dataset and you use the model.

1. Go to **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)
2. Hover over 'Object' in the menu, and select 3D Object, or easily follow through this [link](https://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_object.php?obj_benchmark=3d)
3. You will need the following (Tentative):
    - Download left color images of object data set (12 GB)
    - Download camera calibration matrices of object data set (16 MB)
    - Download training labels of object data set (5 MB)
    - [Optional] Download object development kit (1 MB) (including 3D object detection and bird's eye view evaluation code)

> [! WARNING]
> This is not intended for actual use on the road, or of any purpose. This is an experimentation for using a heuristic (pinhole camera model) to predict distances, although an MAE of $\approx 1.03$ was achieved, this is not a very accurate, proceed with caution


> [! WARNING]
> There also exists a way to infer real time video with fps of 7~10, please be advised that I do not own the source code or libraries of that code, so please be cautious of use of privay issues

Below is the proposal for this project.


You can also get the recommended input size for the NN by running
```bash
python img_size.py
```
You should see an output something like:
```txt
Analyzing 32461 objects...
------------------------------
Count:  32461
WIDTH:  Min: 0.1, Max: 581.4, Avg: 101.2, Median: 68.7
HEIGHT: Min: 12.7, Max: 375.0, Avg: 73.4, Median: 52.4
------------------------------
Data suggests a resolution around: 93 x 93
Success! Plot saved to 'distribution_plot.png' in your current folder.
```
Pick a higher resolution size to avoid data loss, like in this case $128 \times 128$
You will also see a distribution plot of WxH


---
# Hybrid Monocular Distance Estimation using CNN + Pinhole Residual

**Course:** COMP 3106 – Introduction to Artificial Intelligence  
**Student:** Mohamad Ghanem  
**Group:** 195 – Individual

---

## 1. Background and Objectives

Estimating object distance from a single RGB image is a fundamental perception task in computer vision. Depth from a monocular camera is ambiguous in theory, but real scenes provide consistent cues such as object scale in pixels, ground contact position, and class priors.  

The **KITTI dataset** provides per-object 2D boxes and 3D locations in camera coordinates, so the forward distance $Z$ can be used as a supervised training target.

**Objective:**  
Build a lightweight convolutional neural network (CNN) that predicts per-object distance $\hat{Z}$ from cropped detections and compare it to a physics baseline derived from the **pinhole camera model**. The goal is a fast, lightweight metric for real-time distance estimation where deep vision models can be computationally heavy.

---

## 2. Methods

### **Pipeline**
For each labeled object:
1. Read 2D bounding box $(x_1, y_1, x_2, y_2)$  
2. Crop the RGB image with small padding  
3. Resize to $128 \times 128$  
4. Use the label $Z$ from `location=(X, Y, Z)` as the regression target  

### **Model**
A CNN backbone with two independent heads:
- **Classification head:** Softmax over $\{Car, Pedestrian, Cyclist\}$
- **Regression head:** Predicts scalar residual $\widehat{\Delta Z}$

### **Hybrid Estimate**
The pinhole anchor uses focal length $f_x$ (from KITTI calibration) and class-average height $H_c$ (computed only on the training split to avoid leakage).  
With box height $h$ in pixels:

$$
Z_{\text{pin}} \approx \frac{f_x \cdot \bar{H}}{h}, \quad \text{where} \quad 
\bar{H} = \sum_{c} p_c \, H_c
$$

Final estimate:

$$
\hat{Z} = Z_{\text{pin}} + \widehat{\Delta Z}
$$

This combines a physics-based first guess with a learned correction for errors due to pose, occlusion, and camera pitch.

### **Loss Function**
Multi-task objective:

$$
\mathcal{L} = \text{CrossEntropy}(y_{\text{class}}, \hat{\mathbf{p}}) + 
\lambda \cdot \text{SmoothL1}(\hat{Z}, Z)
$$

$\lambda$ is tuned so both terms have similar scale.  
Predicting $\log Z$ or using Smooth L1 improves numerical stability.

---

## 3. Dataset and Environment

### **Dataset**
**KITTI Object Detection**:  
RGB images with labels containing type, 2D bounding box, 3D dimensions, and `location=(X, Y, Z)` in meters.  
Use objects of classes **Car**, **Pedestrian**, **Cyclist**.  
Ignore `DontCare` labels and optionally filter heavily truncated or occluded samples.

### **Targets and Calibration**
- Use $Z$ from `location` as the ground truth distance  
- Use $f_x$ from each calibration file  
- Compute class-average heights $H_c$ from the training split only  

### **Environment**
Python, PyTorch, OpenCV.  
A pretrained detector (e.g., **YOLOv8**) may be used to generate boxes for demo purposes.  
All training and evaluation use ground-truth boxes to focus on distance estimation.

---

## 4. Validation and Metrics

### **Splits**
Train, validation, and test object crops — ensuring no image overlap across splits.

### **Baselines**
- **Pinhole baseline:** $Z_{\text{pin}} = \dfrac{f_x \cdot H_c}{h}$
- **Plain CNN:** Directly predicts $\hat{Z}$ without $Z_{\text{pin}}$

### **Metrics**
- Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
- Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
- $R^2$ on test set
- Per-class MAE
- Nearest-object accuracy (how often the model identifies the closest object correctly by ranking distances)

### **Visuals**
- Scatter plots of $\hat{Z}$ vs $Z$
- Error vs distance curves
- Example frames annotated with predicted $\hat{Z}$ and geometric $Z_{\text{pin}}$

---

## 5. Novelty

This project combines a [pinhole camera model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinhole_camera_model) with a lightweight CNN that learns residual corrections for per-object distance.  

Key contributions:
- Object-level scalar estimation (efficient and explainable)
- Probability-weighted class heights for smooth geometric priors
- Novel rank-based “nearest object” metric for practical evaluation

---

## 6. Weekly Schedule

| **Week** | **Tasks** |
|-----------|-----------|
| **1** | Research related papers. Parse KITTI labels and calibration. Build crop dataset with $Z$ targets. Compute class-average heights $H_c$. |
| **2** | Implement CNN backbone and two heads (plain approach). Train plain CNN to predict $\hat{Z}$. Set up logging and validation curves. |
| **3** | Add pinhole anchor and residual head (hybrid approach). Tune $\lambda$. Run ablations on crop-only vs crop + scalar cues. |
| **4** | Evaluate on test split. Compute MAE, RMSE, $R^2$, per-class results. Measure nearest-object accuracy. Produce plots. |
| **5** | Prepare demo and finalize report. Add optional experiments. |

---

## References

1. Eigen, D., Puhrsch, C., & Fergus, R. (2014). *Depth map prediction from a single image using a multi-scale deep network.* NeurIPS 27. [PDF](https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~bonner/courses/2022s/csc2547/papers/discriminative/image-transformation/depth-prediction,-eigen,-nips-2014.pdf)
2. Laina, I., Rupprecht, C., Belagiannis, V., Tombari, F., & Navab, N. (2016). *Deeper depth prediction with fully convolutional residual networks.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/3DV.2016.32)
3. Godard, C., Mac Aodha, O., & Brostow, G. (2017). *Unsupervised monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.699)
4. Mousavian, A., Anguelov, D., Flynn, J., & Kosecka, J. (2017). *3D bounding box estimation using deep learning and geometry.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.597)
5. **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)

Commit message:

Last commit: Update warning regarding video inference accuracy
Clarify warning about video inference and its limitations.

README.md, after:


# Hybrid Monocular Distance Estimation using CNN + Pinhole Residual
## Mohamad Ghanem, 101192896, Group Number 195

# Initialization steps 
Install requirements using conda:
```bash
conda create --name PROJ3106 python=3.10 -c conda-forge
```
Activate Conda environment:
```bash
conda activate PROJ3106
```
Install dependencies  using pip:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

>[!important] Large files are excluded from this repo for portability. Including a 12GB dataset won't do anyone any good and will just slow down the process. To download the dataset separately, please visit the dataset website (included in references) **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)
> To counter this issue, I have uploaded a pickle file of all the training, calibration, and label sets in the cache folder, thank you for understanding

After cloning the repo and installing the packages from the requirements text file, you can start inference by running this command (make sure you are in the root directory)

```bash
python infer.py --checkpoint resnet18_model/best_model.pth --image unseen_photos/000229.png
```

You can use any model checkpoint you would like to investigate, resnet18_model contains the model with the ResNet-18 pre trained weights.
custom_best_model contains the model with the custom 4 block CNN.

Since the image file is too large to publish on github, I added a random subset of photos from the dataset to "unseen_photos", feel free to pick any of them to infer. You can also play around more with the repo by downloading the dataset from the website.


# Downloading Dataset
Due to the large content of this dataset, please follow the instructions below to download the dataset and you use the model.

1. Go to **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)
2. Hover over 'Object' in the menu, and select 3D Object, or easily follow through this [link](https://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_object.php?obj_benchmark=3d)
3. You will need the following (Tentative):
    - Download left color images of object data set (12 GB)
    - Download camera calibration matrices of object data set (16 MB)
    - Download training labels of object data set (5 MB)
    - [Optional] Download object development kit (1 MB) (including 3D object detection and bird's eye view evaluation code)

> [! WARNING]
> This is not intended for actual use on the road, or of any purpose. This is an experimentation for using a heuristic (pinhole camera model) to predict distances, although an MAE of $\approx 1.03$ was achieved, this is not a very accurate, proceed with caution


> [! WARNING]
> There also exists a way to infer real time video with fps of 7~10, please be advised that I do not own the source code or libraries of that code, so please be cautious of use of privay issues
> Using the video inference violates the i.i.d (independent, identically distributed) assumption as the video frames are not from the trained dataset and therefore are extremely inaccurate, it was just fun to watch.
Below is the proposal for this project.


You can also get the recommended input size for the NN by running
```bash
python img_size.py
```
You should see an output something like:
```txt
Analyzing 32461 objects...
------------------------------
Count:  32461
WIDTH:  Min: 0.1, Max: 581.4, Avg: 101.2, Median: 68.7
HEIGHT: Min: 12.7, Max: 375.0, Avg: 73.4, Median: 52.4
------------------------------
Data suggests a resolution around: 93 x 93
Success! Plot saved to 'distribution_plot.png' in your current folder.
```
Pick a higher resolution size to avoid data loss, like in this case $128 \times 128$
You will also see a distribution plot of WxH


---
# Hybrid Monocular Distance Estimation using CNN + Pinhole Residual

**Course:** COMP 3106 – Introduction to Artificial Intelligence  
**Student:** Mohamad Ghanem  
**Group:** 195 – Individual

---

## 1. Background and Objectives

Estimating object distance from a single RGB image is a fundamental perception task in computer vision. Depth from a monocular camera is ambiguous in theory, but real scenes provide consistent cues such as object scale in pixels, ground contact position, and class priors.  

The **KITTI dataset** provides per-object 2D boxes and 3D locations in camera coordinates, so the forward distance $Z$ can be used as a supervised training target.

**Objective:**  
Build a lightweight convolutional neural network (CNN) that predicts per-object distance $\hat{Z}$ from cropped detections and compare it to a physics baseline derived from the **pinhole camera model**. The goal is a fast, lightweight metric for real-time distance estimation where deep vision models can be computationally heavy.

---

## 2. Methods

### **Pipeline**
For each labeled object:
1. Read 2D bounding box $(x_1, y_1, x_2, y_2)$  
2. Crop the RGB image with small padding  
3. Resize to $128 \times 128$  
4. Use the label $Z$ from `location=(X, Y, Z)` as the regression target  

### **Model**
A CNN backbone with two independent heads:
- **Classification head:** Softmax over $\{Car, Pedestrian, Cyclist\}$
- **Regression head:** Predicts scalar residual $\widehat{\Delta Z}$

### **Hybrid Estimate**
The pinhole anchor uses focal length $f_x$ (from KITTI calibration) and class-average height $H_c$ (computed only on the training split to avoid leakage).  
With box height $h$ in pixels:

$$
Z_{\text{pin}} \approx \frac{f_x \cdot \bar{H}}{h}, \quad \text{where} \quad 
\bar{H} = \sum_{c} p_c \, H_c
$$

Final estimate:

$$
\hat{Z} = Z_{\text{pin}} + \widehat{\Delta Z}
$$

This combines a physics-based first guess with a learned correction for errors due to pose, occlusion, and camera pitch.

### **Loss Function**
Multi-task objective:

$$
\mathcal{L} = \text{CrossEntropy}(y_{\text{class}}, \hat{\mathbf{p}}) + 
\lambda \cdot \text{SmoothL1}(\hat{Z}, Z)
$$

$\lambda$ is tuned so both terms have similar scale.  
Predicting $\log Z$ or using Smooth L1 improves numerical stability.

---

## 3. Dataset and Environment

### **Dataset**
**KITTI Object Detection**:  
RGB images with labels containing type, 2D bounding box, 3D dimensions, and `location=(X, Y, Z)` in meters.  
Use objects of classes **Car**, **Pedestrian**, **Cyclist**.  
Ignore `DontCare` labels and optionally filter heavily truncated or occluded samples.

### **Targets and Calibration**
- Use $Z$ from `location` as the ground truth distance  
- Use $f_x$ from each calibration file  
- Compute class-average heights $H_c$ from the training split only  

### **Environment**
Python, PyTorch, OpenCV.  
A pretrained detector (e.g., **YOLOv8**) may be used to generate boxes for demo purposes.  
All training and evaluation use ground-truth boxes to focus on distance estimation.

---

## 4. Validation and Metrics

### **Splits**
Train, validation, and test object crops — ensuring no image overlap across splits.

### **Baselines**
- **Pinhole baseline:** $Z_{\text{pin}} = \dfrac{f_x \cdot H_c}{h}$
- **Plain CNN:** Directly predicts $\hat{Z}$ without $Z_{\text{pin}}$

### **Metrics**
- Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
- Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
- $R^2$ on test set
- Per-class MAE
- Nearest-object accuracy (how often the model identifies the closest object correctly by ranking distances)

### **Visuals**
- Scatter plots of $\hat{Z}$ vs $Z$
- Error vs distance curves
- Example frames annotated with predicted $\hat{Z}$ and geometric $Z_{\text{pin}}$

---

## 5. Novelty

This project combines a [pinhole camera model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pinhole_camera_model) with a lightweight CNN that learns residual corrections for per-object distance.  

Key contributions:
- Object-level scalar estimation (efficient and explainable)
- Probability-weighted class heights for smooth geometric priors
- Novel rank-based “nearest object” metric for practical evaluation

---

## 6. Weekly Schedule

| **Week** | **Tasks** |
|-----------|-----------|
| **1** | Research related papers. Parse KITTI labels and calibration. Build crop dataset with $Z$ targets. Compute class-average heights $H_c$. |
| **2** | Implement CNN backbone and two heads (plain approach). Train plain CNN to predict $\hat{Z}$. Set up logging and validation curves. |
| **3** | Add pinhole anchor and residual head (hybrid approach). Tune $\lambda$. Run ablations on crop-only vs crop + scalar cues. |
| **4** | Evaluate on test split. Compute MAE, RMSE, $R^2$, per-class results. Measure nearest-object accuracy. Produce plots. |
| **5** | Prepare demo and finalize report. Add optional experiments. |

---

## References

1. Eigen, D., Puhrsch, C., & Fergus, R. (2014). *Depth map prediction from a single image using a multi-scale deep network.* NeurIPS 27. [PDF](https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~bonner/courses/2022s/csc2547/papers/discriminative/image-transformation/depth-prediction,-eigen,-nips-2014.pdf)
2. Laina, I., Rupprecht, C., Belagiannis, V., Tombari, F., & Navab, N. (2016). *Deeper depth prediction with fully convolutional residual networks.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/3DV.2016.32)
3. Godard, C., Mac Aodha, O., & Brostow, G. (2017). *Unsupervised monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.699)
4. Mousavian, A., Anguelov, D., Flynn, J., & Kosecka, J. (2017). *3D bounding box estimation using deep learning and geometry.* [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.597)
5. **KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite.** [Website](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/)
